Update the "linking libraries" document to match current plans (#169)
dotnet/designs: accepted/2020/linking-libraries.md

or limited network will be less likely to install and use applications that are
too large. Additionally, there may be store or device limitations on how big an
acceptable application can be, e.g. how large an of application can be installed
over a cellular network; or installed on watchOS.

Trimming a framework-dependent application can also be advantageous since the
application may depend on libraries and only use a small subset of the
functionality available in those libraries.

The [ILLink](https://github.com/mono/linker) is a tool that is able to take
an application and trim the classes and methods that are not used by the
application. In many scenarios, this results in a significantly smaller packaged
application.

This document describes how to modify libraries to work well with the ILLink.

*Note:For .NET Core frameworks our goal is to use the .NET Libraries for all
.NET applications. In previous releases, Xamarin and Blazor applications
have been using the Mono libraries, which have been written with size in mind.
However, the .NET Libraries have traditionally been concerned with throughput
and not size. As such, it may take multiple releases to meet all size goals

> with the .NET Libraries.*

Author: It is the case for template applications for Blazor and Xamarin, where we're basically on par with mono. It's not the case for some other features - for example our serialization stacks are much larger than the relatively simplistic implementations in mono.

> with the .NET Libraries.*

Reviewer: > for example our serialization stacks are much larger than the relatively simplistic implementations in mono

Which serialization stacks? DCS? XML? BinaryFormatter?

> with the .NET Libraries.*

Author: I know that Marek mentioned XML specifically as being very large in .NET Core while the mono implementation is tiny (doesn't have the same feature-set but it's obviously enough for mono). I haven't measured this myself.

> with the .NET Libraries.*

Reviewer 2: > I'd heard that we expect we're already at approximate parity. Is that not the case?

That's approximately correct for "template" like apps where we have done initial work to get the size under control. However, that's not the ultimate goal.

> Which serialization stacks?

All of them

> XML specifically as being very large in .NET Core 

XML as a whole thing is very trimming unfriendly (no work has done there and the code was not written with minimal dependencies in mind). For now, we managed to drop the dependencies to XML altogether but this might not work for end-user apps.

> with the .NET Libraries.*

Reviewer: > All of them

Mono had its own implementation of JsonSerializer?

> with the .NET Libraries.*

Reviewer: No. a) That's a completely different API. b) It's not a serializer. c) Its use is discouraged. d) That existed here, too: https://github.com/dotnet/corefx/tree/release/3.0/src/System.Json/src/System/Json.

> with the .NET Libraries.*

Reviewer: And, DCS... mono had its own independent implementation?

> with the .NET Libraries.*

Reviewer 2: > That's a completely different API

You asked and I'm only showing up what developers had available and not proposing touching that in any form or shape. This was JSON API with serialization support over DataContract.

> DCS... mono had its own independent implementation?

We had tweaked .NET FX implementation with static generators https://github.com/mono/mono/tree/master/mcs/class/System.Runtime.Serialization/ReferenceSources

> with the .NET Libraries.*

Reviewer: > You asked

Right, I'm trying to understand the comment that was made.  For any given serialization stack, if it's the case that mono has a functionally-equivalent implementation that's much more trimmable, that's very interesting and should give us leads on how to proceed to improve the ones in dotnet/runtime.  If it's the case that mono used the same code and just tweaked it, then we should be able to copy those same tweaks rather than starting an investigation from scratch.  But if it's the case that we're talking about a completely different API rather than different implementations of the same API, that's apples-to-oranges and isn't interesting for this conversation / document.

1. Any code or data that are not used by the application should be removed from
the application.

Note the difference in "must" and "should" between those two concerns.
An application that works is preferred over a smaller application that doesn't.
Therefore it is critical that any necessary code must be preserved in the application.

## Scenarios and User Experience

The ILLink can be executed on a .NET application and the developer will be
confident that the trimmed application works correctly, while reducing its
final size.

The developer can also enable trim analysis to gain confidence that trimming
will not introduce unexpected changes to the application's behavior. The feedback
presented by the analysis must be actionable in the context of the application.

### Goals

1. Ensure all required code is preserved by the linker.
1. Application size is as small as possible.
1. Trim analysis feedback is actionable for application developers.

## Design

There are a number of things the author of a library needs to undertake in order
to make it work well with trimmed applications. In general they fall into
the two buckets outlined above:

> 1. Trimming compatibility
> 1. Smaller Size

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Ensuring code required for correctness is preserved by the linker
1. Ensuring as much of the library as is possible is trimmable if not directly used
```
or something like that.  As written, these aren't really things that can be "undertaken".

executed, an error occurs because the Type is no longer available in the application.

#### How trimming works

The trimming operates on the entire application including the application assemblies
any dependent libraries and frameworks. It starts with known entry points to
the application (for example the `Main` method) and marks everything the entry point
needs to run. This logic is applied recursively to mark all the code the application
needs.

The trimming tool has built-in knowledge of some of the most common problematic
patterns and relies on annotations like `RequiresUnreferencedCodeAttribute` or
`DynamicallyAccessedMembersAttribute` to determine the rest. If it encounters
a pattern which it can't recognize or handle for other reasons it generates
a trim analysis warning.

Such warning tells the user that there's code in the application which may
require additional dependency which the tool could not figure out and thus
it's possible the app will not work correctly after trimming.

See the [Linker Reflection Flow Design](https://github.com/mono/linker/blob/master/docs/design/reflection-flow.md)
for more information on how the process works.

#### Annotating code

> Some library code can use reflection or other problematic patterns and thus
> running the trimming tool on it can break its functionality and it generates
> trim analysis warnings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some library code can use reflection or other problematic patterns such that
running the trimming tool on it can break its functionality and generate
trim analysis warnings.
```

Warnings originating in the library code itself are not actionable by the end

> user as they frequently point to internal implementation details and it's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user as they frequently point to internal implementation details, and it's
```

typically hard to determine which part of the application relies on
the affected functionality.

For this reason, affected libraries need to be annotated to help trimming tools
to better understand the code and to generate warnings which are actionable
in the context of an application. The goal is for the library code itself to
not generate any warnings (as those are not actionable) and instead either
resolve them (by providing annotations which help the trimming tool correctly
recognize all dependencies) or to annotate public APIs such that the problem

> can be resolved in the call site by the tool automatically or the warning
> is generated pointing at the user code which uses the affected API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be resolved in the call site by the tool automatically or by the user following the guidance
provided by the warning and the affected API it calls out.
```

> Depending on the specific problematic pattern different solutions can be employed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the specific problematic pattern, different solutions can be employed.
```

> The list below is not complete list, it's just the most common patterns we've seen

Reviewer: The headers of each section below describe the solution rather than the pattern/problem.

so far. The list below describes the progression of improvements which should
be made for any affected feature.

The order of these is essentially the recommended order in which to try to
apply the solutions as they go roughly in increasing order of complexity.

#### Refactor hardcoded reflection

> The trim tool can already recognize lot of reflection patterns if they are hard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trim tool can already recognize a lot of reflection patterns if they are hard
```

coded (type and member names specified as literals in the code). But it doesn't work
on all such patterns. If the affected code is using what can be described as
hard coded reflection it is often possible to rewrite it in such a way that the
trim tool can recognize all of its patterns and avoid any issues that way. If that

> is not possible or practical a reasonable attempt should be made to improve the trimming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is not possible or practical, a reasonable attempt should be made to improve the trimming
```

tool and teach it about such pattern.

Example of a refactoring: [Using statically known types instead of types from reflection.](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/commit/29c4895d13ed8768ee5e8307ccef01dff38c1289#diff-58f0fbbb8b2d1c2d89fdae163e981f01697cb4c2de1fe67e6e171504bc615586L1176-L1178)

#### Annotate with DynamicallyAccessedMembers

> If the code passes around values of `System.Type` type, these can be annotated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the code passes around values of the `System.Type` type, these can be annotated
```

with [`DynamicallyAccessedMembersAttribute`](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.diagnostics.codeanalysis.dynamicallyaccessedmembersattribute.-ctor?view=net-5.0)
to declare requirements on the type stored in the value. The trim tool uses
this information to both enforce the fulfillment of the requirements
as well as validate that these are sufficient for the code using the values.

This attribute is similar in nature to the nullable annotations that were added
in C# 8 in that they are both viral. `DynamicallyAccessedMembers` needs to be
applied from the actual usage of Reflection all the way through the call tree
to the location that specifies the Type, which may be a public API.

[Cross method annotation](https://github.com/mono/linker/blob/master/docs/design/reflection-flow.md#cross-method-annotations)
has more details on the design of this trimming feature.

Example of using these annotations:
[Annotate type parameter to include constructor if the method body asks for it
via `GetConstructor`.](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/36532/files#diff-58f0fbbb8b2d1c2d89fdae163e981f01697cb4c2de1fe67e6e171504bc615586L1116-L1131)

#### Suppress warnings

> If the warning while technically correct does not affect app's functionality,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the warning while technically correct does not affect an app's functionality,
```

consider suppressing it. For this add [`UnconditionalSuppressMessageAttribute`](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.diagnostics.codeanalysis.unconditionalsuppressmessageattribute?view=net-5.0)
(its usage is nearly identical to [`SuppressMessageAttribute`](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.diagnostics.codeanalysis.suppressmessageattribute?view=net-5.0),
but it will be kept in the code for all configurations).

Example of suppressing warning on code which doesn't change behavior when trimmed:
[Trimming fields on attributes doesn’t affect equality](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/commit/0f97c7af662c68862995c0b2ab59e87242eff459#diff-a911305f19a82ebd3a64f9293f9e5347ff15c74d5440f6bc56af65f1fa56e9b8L17-L18)

#### Declare explicit dynamic dependency

In cases where the trimming tool is not able to infer the dependency or
the developer wants to be explicit, the [`DynamicDependencyAttribute`](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.diagnostics.codeanalysis.dynamicdependencyattribute?view=net-5.0)
can be used to state an explicit dependency from a method to a type/method.

> The trimming tool doesn’t reason about this dependency. If the annotated method

Author: Agreed - removed the sentence.

#### .NET Libraries challenges

There are features in the .NET Libraries that will be very expensive, and in some
cases virtually impossible, to make 100% trim compatible. A few examples are:

* `System.ComponentModel.Composition`, `System.Composition`, and other dependency
injection style libraries
    * Contains features such as loading "parts" from a directory
* `Microsoft.CSharp` and `System.Linq.Expressions`
    * Use Reflection extensively to implement `dynamic` and expression trees
* `Assembly.Load/LoadFrom/LoadFile`
    - Dynamically loading assemblies into a trimmed application is problematic
because if the trim tool isn't aware of those assemblies, it won't know to preserve
the methods required by those assemblies. If the core application doesn't need
`string.Split`, trimming will remove the `Split` method. When an assembly that
the trim tool didn't know about is loaded dynamically, it may need `string.Split`,
and fail to run.
* `System.Reflection.Emit`
    * A method or property that is only called by dynamically generated code may

> be trimmed if the linker isn't aware of it.

Reviewer: This seems like too broad a category to include here.  There are plenty of S.R.Emit solutions that can be appropriately annotated to teach the linker what APIs are actually used, and in many cases, follow patterns with hardcoded reflection the linker already understands.

Author: I removed the RefEmit item as it's not a good example. As you mention in lot of cases it is actually perfectly compatible with trimming, or can be made that way without to much trouble.

* Does it handle derived types?
* Does call (even optionally) any methods on the objects during
serialization or deserialization?

As of this writing, there is not a bullet proof solution for the trimming to work
in all serialization cases. See [Recursive properties](https://github.com/mono/linker/issues/1087)
for a proposal on what it would take to make `JsonSerializer` at least partially
trim compatible.

One solution that would solve most of the issues is to create
[Source Generators](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/introducing-c-source-generators/)
for each supported serializer. This would remove the use of Reflection,
and would allow the trim tool to more easily see which code must be preserved.
However, Source Generators are a new feature and are potentially expensive to create.
As such, it may take some time before they are used broadly.

### Smaller Size

To make applications smaller, we have to let the trim tool know what code is not
necessary and can be removed. A lot of times it is obvious that if a method
isn't called, it can be trimmed and the trim tool will recognize this automatically.
But there are places where unnecessary code looks like it is being called.

> #### Removing features

Reviewer: As with the earlier bulleted list, the previous paragraph reads to me as if it's going to be followed by a list of places where unnecessary code doesn't actually get trimmed, but then these headers aren't about such categories of problems but rather about the solutions to such problems.  Consider changing these headers to describe the category of problem that all share the same solution, rather than naming it based on the solution.

ideally not have any descriptor files in them, as those unconditionally add code
into the application potentially making it unnecessarily large.
[Example of a discussion on solutions of this problem](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/31712)

There are 2 existing cases which are somewhat special here worth mentioning:

1. Types only used for Debugging
1. Types used for COM support

In both of these cases, the code is sometimes needed, and sometimes isn't.
If you are never going to debug your application (for example, the application
is deployed to a device that can't be debugged), it isn't necessary to keep
these types in the application. A similar situation exists with COM.
Since COM is not IL, the trim tool isn't able to see if some code in
the application is going to use COM or not.

To solve these, we can define a [feature switch](#Feature-Switches) for each of
these scenarios. An application (or SDK) can default these to on or off, as appropriate.
For example, a Xamarin iOS application can safely turn COM support off.

#### Analyzing Canonical Applications

Application size is similar to throughput performance in that you can't guess

> at what could effect an application size. You have to measure it. In order to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at what could affect an application size. You have to measure it. In order to
```

We can add more switches to the libraries to allow large, optional pieces of code
to be removed during trimming.

Examples of other feature switches:

* `ResourceManager`
    * `ResourceManager` has logic that can load types from the resource file.
This could be conditionally disabled by a feature switch. It is already disabled
when loading a `.resource` file directly from disk, which is not embedded in a
resource assembly. [Issue tracking this work](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/45272).
    * Another possibility is a switch to make exception/resource messages
smaller in the libraries. See [issue](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/34057)
for more information.
* `EventSource`
    * On some devices the `EventSource` logic is unnecessary because it has no
place to write the events. We can introduce a feature switch to remove
`EventSource` code/calls. [Issue tracking this work](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/37414)

#### Usage of descriptor files

Trimming .NET applications has been around for a while in the Xamarin scenarios.
To add the ability to overcome limitations of the trim tool,

> a descriptor files where introduces. These are instructions to the trim tool

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
descriptor files were introduced. These are instructions to the trim tool
```

to preserve some type/method always, without seeing a direct reference to it.

There are libraries which already use these descriptor files (or `ILLinkTrim.xml`
in the `dotnet/runtime` repo) which are embedded into the library assembly.

The problem is that the trim tool never trims the specified method/type,
even if the part of the library which requires such dependency is not needed
by the application and is actually trimmed away.

See [issue](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/31712) and
[another issue](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/35199)
for examples of this problem.

To solve this the code should use one of the approaches described above. Typically
either make the hard coded code recognizable by the trim tool directly or use
`DynamicDependencyAttribute` to explicitly express a dependency. Libraries should
ideally not have any descriptor files in them, as those unconditionally add code
into the application potentially making it unnecessarily large.
[Example of a discussion on solutions of this problem](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/31712)

There are 2 existing cases which are somewhat special here worth mentioning:

> 1. Types only used for Debugging

Author: I just reworded it here a bit. I think it's valuable to show this in the descriptor file - we actually implement both via descriptor files even though they're behind a feature switch.
We had a discussion if these should move to some random "Root" method or if we should keep them in the descriptor. I think the descriptor usage in these cases is OK - so I'll leave it here.

1. Developers can write their own logic and extensions to the dependency graph.
1. We can have template notebooks that show examples of how to analyze an
application's size.
1. When a new feature is added to the Analyzer, we just need to create a public API.
We don't need to create command line arguments.
1. We have the option of visuals and more interactive output - for example hyperlinks.
In a console application, you are stuck with text.

[PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview/) has size displaying capabilities
as well. If ILLink outputted the size and graph information in the format PerfView
is capable of displaying, developers could use PerfView to do the size analysis.

### Analysis and feedback

The goal is to make the experience predictable, as such the plan is to employ
multiple tools to provide feedback to developers about the application's compatibility
with trimming (and other modes of deploying the app). These tools will run in
different stages of the SDK pipeline. Roslyn analyzers will be added to provide
immediate feedback about the source code during code editing and in inner build loops.

> There’s already ILLink tool which performs trimming but also analyses the app

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There’s already ILLink which performs trimming but also analyses the app
```

Similarly, for options like single-file, AOT and so on. To this end there needs
to be a mechanism through which user declares an intent to trim the application
(or use single-file and so on). This mechanism must be in place across the entire
SDK pipeline and not just during the publish phase.

The existing properties which enable publishing features like `PublishTrimmed`
or `PublishSingleFile` will be used to also declare intent to use the respective
feature during publishing. The values for these properties should be set in the
project of the application to declare such intent.

At publishing they will be the defaults but can still be overwritten with
command-line or publish-only settings. These values will also have no direct
effect on for example building the application, that is setting `PublishSingleFile=true`
will not produce a single-file from `dotnet build`.

More details provided in [Analyzers for publish only functionality](https://github.com/dotnet/sdk/issues/14562)

### Feature Switches

Feature switches were introduced to make it possible to disable functionality
which is typically included by default with a given .NET Core application,

> but it's either incompatible with trimming or it makes the resulting application

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
but either is incompatible with trimming or makes the resulting application
```
